[music]
Pushkin.
>> Previously on Revisionist History.
He was taken out of his cell thinking
that his execution was imminent,
strapped to a gurnie, and [music]
he's asking, you know, the corrections
officers who are with them, what's going
on? You know, an anesthesiologist in
[music] good standing is not going to
spend their Wednesdays over at the, you
know, state corrections sticking IVs in
people for execution. It's not something
that we do [music]
>> because a coldblooded convicted killer
complains about the proddding and poking
of a small ivy line.
Really
potting and poking with a needle.
after 3 and 1/2 or 4 hours being
strapped to a gurnie. Um,
you know, he was unable to
uh stand, walk,
unbutton his shirt, you know, change his
clothes, do any of that without
assistance.
They attempted to kill him on November
17th. His lawyers called me, I think 10
days later. I didn't know them. They
didn't know me. And they said, you know,
we have a client who's had this thing
happen. He's really struggling. Um,
would you take a look at him? I want
talk to him.
In the months after his botched [music]
execution, Kenny Smith had a confidant,
Kate Porterfield, a psychologist who
specializes in trauma.
She has consulted on dozens of death row
cases in her career, spent a lot of time
at the US Military Prison at Guantanamo
Bay, worked for years treating patients
at the clinic for torture victims at
Belleview Hospital in Manhattan.
A very good friend of mine, Steven,
knows her well and told me one day, "You
have to meet my friend Kate. She has the
strangest job in [music] America." So, I
called her up and we began to talk with
no real [music] plan or agenda. And in
one of our conversations, she told me
about a case that I'd never heard about
before and a person she'd been asked to
evaluate who had [music] affected her
deeply,
Kenny Smith.
That's how I learned about the murder of
Elizabeth Senate. Everything in this
series began with my conversations with
Kate [music] Porterfield.
So, tell me about your first
visit with Kenny.
>> So, my first contact with him was a call
actually. Um, it was remarkably
pleasant. Kenny was a very resilient
man. He was, you know, he had been on
death row for 34 years. This was a man
used to living on death row and used to
being in prison. And one of the things
he said to me is, you know, he used to
call me doc. He'd say, "Doc, I am very
institutionalized. I know how to do
this. I've made a life here. I have a
very good set of friends here and I have
really good relationships on the
outside." He had been married. He had
children from before he went in and he
had relationships with his children. So
he said to me, "Uh, I'm very
institutionalized. I've been through a
lot, but I'm actually pretty stable. And
he said, "But I'm I'm falling apart
right now from what happened." I mean, I
think what now what I think is he was
signaling to me,
um, I'm pretty sturdy, but this really
messed me up.
>> [music]
>> Kate Porterfield would end up spending
many hours with Kenny Smith [music] over
the next year, talking to him on the
phone, visiting him at home in prison,
[music] trying to understand what
happened to him in that execution
chamber on the night of November [music]
17th, 2022,
trying to figure out how damaged [music]
he had been by the experience,
writing an assessment of his condition
that could be used by his legal team in
[music] court, and most of all,
just trying to understand who he was.
My name is Malcolm Gladwell. You're
listening [music] to the Alabama
murders.
In this installment, I want to look
[music] at Kenny Smith through the eyes
of Kate Porterfield to see the Kenny
Smith that she saw in those [music] many
encounters between the end of 2022 and
the long winter of 2023.
This is episode 6,
the Porterfield Sessions.
[music]
In my third conversation with Kate
Porterfield, well before we got to Kenny
Smith, she told me about a patient she'd
seen many years ago, an older man. This
is when she was working at the torture
clinic at Belleview. He was a refugee
from a war torn country. He'd been
imprisoned, tortured, and at one point
he had been subjected to a mock
execution. He had been made to believe
by his capttors that he was about to
die. So, this was probably the first
person I ever worked with who had a mock
execution. And it is its own
unimaginable horror that leaves a
really, really bad physical
physiological rather imprint.
Her goal was to gently push him back
towards his traumatic experience to
better understand and to help him.
>> He was very rigid and he would sit just
really tightly wound in the sessions
really gripping the chair and [snorts]
I
he didn't want to go there.
>> It took a very long time to draw him
out. She would go on to work with five
or six other patients who had gone
through something similar. A gun they
thought was loaded, put to their head,
only to realize it was empty. Being held
underwater almost long enough, and even
in one case, being left in a cage with a
lion.
She came to believe that this kind of
experience deserved its own category.
Why is a mock execution uniquely
damaging?
>> Let me say it this way. When someone
says you're about to die, you know,
you're terrified and and terror doesn't
even capture, right? You're you're you
know, most people lose control in some
part of their body, maybe their bladder
or bowel. You know, there's usually
incredible e exclaiming of horror. You
know, it's it's it's it's not good to
think you're about to die. I mean, I've
seen six people or whatever try to
describe it to me and they all fall
apart. It's it's like I've never had
someone say it the first time and not
really fall apart, like collapse
and different ways. I had a guy uh who
had been kidnapped and they the the the
soldiers came in and said, "If we don't
get the ransom, you know, we're going to
kill you." And then they came in the
next day and they had a gun and they put
it to his head. This man was the most
put together, disciplined, you know,
kind of controlled guy. And when he
tried to tell that moment, he he just
fell down in his chair and grabbed his
head and he was like, "My head's
hurting. My head's hurting. I can't I
can't." there's just this incredible
physiological,
you know, probably hormonal dump into
his system of the same thing that
happened, you know, when the mock
execution took place. So, essentially
what trauma does is it it becomes
imprinted in your body and your memory
banks are then linked and hooked up with
the fear reaction. So, that's the
problem. It's a bad linkage. And so when
you think about being told, "I'm about
to kill you." And then you try to tell
it, your body just goes, it goes right
into that state of terror.
This is the first thing that Kate
Porterfield saw when she sat down with
Kenny Smith, that he was in that special
category. But his experience, in some
ways, was even more overwhelming. This
was not a mock execution. It was a
botched execution. Meaning it wasn't a
trick. They were actually intending to
execute Kenny. They [music] just didn't
manage to pull it off. And Kate wasn't
treating someone years after it had
occurred [music] with Kenny Smith. This
had just happened. This was different.
You know, this was this very
orchestrated, slow
um systematic
process being done by these guys all in
this room who he knew. Guys who had been
his guards for like some of them. Some
of them he knew, some he didn't. you
know, guys he's known for a lot of years
trying to kill him. Very hard to wrap
your brain around. How did the guards
react,
>> you know? I think that he believed they
got very rattled and he watched it on
their faces, but no one could do
anything. And it's a scary narrative
then of what people will do with orders,
right? Like I mean there was a point
after all these poking of him with
needles going around his feet, his arms
where they took the gurnie and inverted
it upwards with his feet up and left him
there for I have to look, but I think it
was upwards of 20 minutes, 30 minutes.
They came back in and
>> trying to get blood to flow.
>> So then they started poking on his
collarbone. So they took this man, they
tipped him upside down so that the blood
would rush to a part of his body. They
came back in, they injected him with
something which he believes and we
believe was probably a painkiller and
then they started going on his neck, you
know, around his collarbone. I mean, I'm
sorry, but how I don't imagine that a
person who's doing that and witnessing
it can walk away from that unscathed
themselves.
Kenny wanted to apologize to the Senate
family [music] and say goodbye to his
own family, but he was all alone with
the execution team. He thought they were
killing him before the witnesses could
get there.
And he he said one of the ways he stayed
calm when he when there was all that
dead time was he would he would say to
himself, "Turn to the right to the
victim's family and apologize. Turn to
the left, tell my family I love them."
[music] So he had this little practice
to the right, I'm sorry. To the left, I
love you. And he said that kind of
helped him pass the time, which also was
like remarkable [music] to me. He was
thinking thinking about how you're
managing like how you're going to
choreograph this.
They come back in, they begin to untie
the the tourniquet on his arm, and they
say, "It's over now."
And then one of the people on the team
who he didn't know says to him, "It's
over and I'll be praying for you."
So these kinds of moments for Kenny were
just, what's the word?
Unmanageable. Afterwards, they were
unmanageable moments with other humans.
One minute they were trying to kill him,
then they weren't trying to kill him.
>> It's very confusing. And then the man,
you know, references God.
Kenny's, you know, most core faith,
right, was is his belief in God and his
belief that because of his faith, you
know, he had really been saved.
Not I'm not talking about saved in the
execution. I'm saying saved as a man.
You know, that his faith saved him. So,
this collision of people trying to kill
you, your body being in something that
we don't really understand unless you've
had unless you thought you're going to
die, and then someone bringing God in
and saying this sort of generous thing,
I'm going to pray for you. It was it
like the word unmanageable is what I
keep coming up with. He he couldn't
grasp it and he couldn't he couldn't
deal with it after. I mean there were
many things that made him distress but
that was one.
You know the warden taking his head and
saying this is this is what's best for
you was another.
Kate Porterfield would end up having 17
marathon phone sessions with Kenny Smith
and she would twice fly down to Alabama
to meet with him [music] in person.
And after he had told her the story of
what happened on November 17th, he told
her the story of his life [music] in the
years leading up to the murder of
Elizabeth Sinnate.
That's [music]
after the break.
Kenny Smith's full name was Kenneth
Eugene Smith. Both Kenny and his brother
Joey were named for their father, a
truck driver named Wesley Eugene Smith.
>> Did you ever regret naming them after?
>> I did.
>> Linda Smith, Kenny Smith's mom, still
lives in the Scholes. She spoke with Lee
Hedgepath, a local reporter who knew
Kenny well, and covered his case.
>> Has he passed now, Jean?
>> Oh, yes. Yeah, he um I think he was 45
when he passed.
>> Linda and Jean had five children
together in quick succession. Kenny was
the eldest.
>> He didn't really want a child at that at
that point.
>> Why do you think that was?
>> I just I don't know.
I guess he wouldn't
through with his wild oats, I guess.
>> So, tell me about the wild oats.
>> Uh, not too much of a drinker, more of
like pills. Back then, it was kind of
uppers and downers.
>> Jean was on the road a lot. He had
another relationship. Linda says it was
with an underage girl. Jean got her
pregnant, but he still came around to
see Linda, to sleep with her, or just to
hit her.
Oh yeah, he always did that just about.
>> When did it start?
>> I mean, not when we first started
dating. It started
I guess it started after Kenya was born,
you know. Uh
what I think is he was doing stuff and
he was thinking I was, you know,
>> right?
>> He was jealous. Yeah. And but I wasn't,
you know.
I had a kid to raise.
I mean, he would just hit me in the head
and I mean, I've still got a scar right
there where he threw a bottle at me and
right here. It may have been gone now,
but it it would just, you know, hit me,
knocked me in the floor, slapped me.
Well, see, like I said, he thought that
I was, you know, out doing stuff and
partying and like I said, which I
wasn't.
And
can you recall like for example the
incident with the bottle? Can you tell
me what happened then? Do you remember?
>> Yeah. I mean I I mean I didn't know he
was coming in that night which it didn't
matter. Um but I was at home you know
and a friend of mine from work was just
there with me and Kenny was there and he
just came in and he was just in a rage
that night.
Do you remember what Kenny's reaction
would be when that's happening? How old
is Kenny around this time? And
>> around that time, he's probably three or
four.
I mean, every run get up on the couch
and sit
him and Joey and just, you know.
>> Do you remember anything that Kenny ever
said to you either when the abuse was
happening or afterwards? Uh yeah. I mean
he would I mean you know and hug me and
you know
I guess you know
I guess he was telling me you know
everything would be okay.
[music]
Kenny would draw pictures and give them
to his mom.
At Kenny's sentencing hearing. A series
of witnesses testified about Jean's
abuse. One was a woman who worked as a
waitress with Linda. Jean would come
into the restaurant when Linda was
working. This is what she said. Well, he
would take what money Linda had made in
tips and if she did not make what he
thought he needed, she would get slapped
and beat around right in the restaurant.
He would walk in and he would tell her
he needed to talk to her. Well, she
would walk off into a private place with
him, which was around the corner in the
hall, and the next thing you know, you
would hear this commotion, and he would
be beating her. He would slap her and he
would hit her with his fist. I have seen
him back her up in a corner and just
beating her. And I have seen her when
her pocket would be torn on the uniform
where he had taken the money out of it.
Question: And how often would he come
around? Answer: Well, at least three two
to three times a week that happened. He
always made a point to hit her around
the eyes.
The fifth of the children Linda and Jean
had together was Michael, who died a few
hours after birth. His lungs never
developed. In testimony, Kenny's brother
Joey said, quote, "Well, he blamed
mother for it and said it was her fault.
And pretty soon, you know, she felt bad,
even kind of accepted the blame and
started drinking real heavy. Question:
Does your mom drink now today? Answer:
No. Kenny, Joey said in his testimony,
was the one taking care of her. He would
be in there with a cold rag on her head,
cleaning up the vomit out of the floor
when she missed the commode, and trying
to wrestle her up out of the floor to
get her in the bed because she was a big
woman. Question: How old do you think
Kenny was the first time that you saw
him picking your mama up and talking to
her and wiping her? How old do you think
he was? Answer: Probably eight or nine.
Question: Did there ever come a time
when you saw your brother turn to
drinking? Answer: Oh yes. Question, do
you remember how old he was? Answer: He
was 16. Question: Did there ever come a
time when you saw your brother start to
drink too much? answer. Yes.
Kenny met a woman. They had a child
together, Michael, named for Kenny's
brother who died. They moved to a house
in [music] Florence. And one day, a
friend of his from a high school asked
him if he wanted a little quick money
roughing someone up.
And off he and John Parker went in
Parker's Pontiac Grand Prix with a
hunting knife and a fifth of Wild Turkey
on the console between them to do what
[music] he had seen people do 100 times
in his life.
[music]
Kate Porterfield and I sometimes
digressed into more personal subjects.
We talked a lot about our kids and
parenting, what she had learned as a
mother of three daughters. And there was
something she said at one point that I
can't stop thinking about.
>> You know, Katherine Harrison, you know
that is she's a great writer. Yeah. And
she she wrote this incredible memoir
about her life with her father who had
disappeared and then got involved with
her in incredibly inappropriate way. And
it was it's a beautiful very painful
memoir, very brave. And she has a line
in there, I'm going to get it wrong, but
where she says, "We think that parenting
is about unconditional love." And what
we mean by that is that um the parents
have unconditional love towards the
children. But what you learn as you grow
and as you have kids is that actually
the unconditional love is coming from
the child to the parent. Um and I will
say I see that all the time in my
patients who got abused as children
which is they love their parents.
They're hungry for their parents. They
yearn for the memory of their parent to
be the good parts. And it doesn't matter
that the parents did terrible things to
them.
>> It doesn't matter.
>> No. I mean it matters to who they've
become but in their sense of self.
>> Oh I see. They yearn for that parent.
Children have an unconditional My point
is children have an unconditional love
of the parent.
>> When Kate Porterfield was just out of
college, she had been attacked by a
stranger. He took her by surprise and
beat her up. She suffered from what she
now realizes was PTSD.
It took her years to recover. That
experience was one of the reasons she
developed such an interest in treating
trauma.
She had no connection to her attacker,
though. no reason to return to him. It
was possible to understand ultimately
that this was just a case of being in
the wrong place [music] at the wrong
time. But what if he wasn't a stranger?
What if you loved your attacker? And
what if your love was so powerful and
instinctual that you couldn't help
yourself that you kept coming back again
and [music] again hoping things might be
different?
I think that's another kind of suffering
that deserves its own category.
>> [music]
>> I can't tell you how many of the moms of
my clients were sexually abused. I can't
tell you. It's incredible, you know, and
you just go, it's just perpetrating and
perpetrating and perpetrating through
generations.
>> I'm curious about what it is. You said
that dealing with these repeated cases
of people who had been through this kind
of childhood experience
>> taught you a lot. I want to put my
finger on what it taught you.
>> I understood child development. I I
trained in child psychology and I was
like, you know, pretty good on it. But
when you see it go wrong, you really
then understand what it takes for it to
go right. And so watching again and
again men, grown men sitting across from
me, covered with tattoos, you know, guys
who had killed a couple people maybe,
um,
crying, watching these men sobbing when
they recounted being 8 years old and
being here's one and I'll frame
carefully, but you know, raped at age 8
multiple times by an older family member
and this, you know, person who had
committed homicide no question sobbing
talking about it. That was so powerful
for me in getting me to understand that
this guy sitting across from me who is
quote unquote scary to everybody in the
world and he looks scary, right?
He is a hurt person. If you go all the
way back, he's a hurt little boy and
he's now got warrior he's got warrior
all over himself, right? He's got
armor. He's got tattoos all over his
face. He's so badass. and he hurts
people, right? And it all, if you can
kind of back channel it and go back in
time, he was a little boy who had
happened to him. He was really, really
harmed.
>> In this hypothetical, semi-hypothetical
case of the guy with the tattoos.
>> Yeah.
>> Uh, how often in his life do you think
he talked about that childhood abuse to
somebody?
>> Never. He had never never talked about
it.
>> More to the point, no one bothered to
ask him until she did. And it and then I
went and visited his family and
interviewed all these relatives. It was
100% known. Everybody knew this older
relative sexually abused kids in in the
family and particularly had done so with
this with this child.
Nothing ever done. Imagine.
No treatment, no assessment, no law
enforcement, nothing. Now imagine what
that does to that kid. Think about the
growing sense of yourself.
>> I'm going to get hurt by this person.
Everyone's going to know.
People are terrifying. They hurt you.
And there's no recourse ever anywhere.
>> The waitress who worked with Kenny's
mother remembered this detail about
Kenny's interactions with his dad at the
trial. She said, "You did not see him go
to Jean or like, you know, like a child
usually runs up to his daddy and
approaches him that he was glad to see
him or that his daddy was glad to see
him."
>> [music]
>> At first, when I read that, I thought
she meant that the tragedy of Kenny and
Jean was that Kenny didn't want to run
up and hug his father.
But after talking to Kate Porterfield, I
realized no, it's much worse. It's that
he wanted to run up and hug his father,
but understood even at that age that
that was impossible.
Kenny Smith's crime was not committed in
isolation.
It was a violent act that came at the
end of a long cascade.
>> We like people to either be victims or
bad guys, right? And so victims are
people that things happen to and people
who do bad things are just people who do
bad things. And what what the the area
that that [music] I think we're woefully
missing as um especially in criminal
justice is seeing that people who do
things that are against the law or even
violent or even murder um are usually
and or frequently doing that themselves
having suffered really bad harm, hurt,
maltreatment, abuse, violence. People
have a hard time recognizing that a lot
of bad behaviors come out of trauma,
too.
At the very beginning of the series, I
played an excerpt of part of my
conversation with Kate Porterfield. It
was about the first time she saw Kenny
Smith in person at home in prison in
December of 2022, about a month after
the botched execution. And now I want to
play it again because now I think it
will make more sense. It will be easier
to see why this case out of the many
Kate Porterfield has done affected her
so deeply.
>> When I first went to see Kenny, he
wanted to talk for the first probably 2
hours of our visit about how beautiful
his goodbyes were and the love he
received from his family as he was going
into the execution. That's what he
wanted to start with. And I found this
so powerful and and also fascinating
honestly as a clinician because what I
first thought was, "Oh, he's avoiding,
right? He he can't talk about the
execution. He he spent a lot of time
telling me the story of everything else,
the goodbyes, the phone calls, the last
meal, what people said to him. I mean,
he went through each family member, his
grandson, his mom. So he told me all
about his last visit with her and saying
goodbye to her, her walking out of the
visiting room and turning back to him,
you know, and it was all about love. He
talked to me about love for for probably
two two and a half hours. So he
really kind of got me. He he he he made
me really pause and think a lot, Kenny
Smith, because watching someone only
start from a place of love after
something so horrible was I had never
seen that before.
>> You don't think he was avoiding the
subject?
>> Well, I think he was in a way. I think
both were true. And I would and I
ultimately we got to know each other
well and I could tease him a little and
say, you know, you know, you got the
gift of Gab, Kenny. were really good at
like keeping me off the stuff that and
he would just laugh and say, "Oh yeah, I
don't want to go there. I don't want to
go there, doc." And he would say, "I get
nauseous. I start sweating. I can't do
it. Don't make me do it, doc." So, like,
we got to a place where we knew what
avoidance was. But I don't think that's
the whole ball game. I think what really
happened is that I got to have this time
with this man who thought he was about
to die and had a pre-death experience of
intense love.
>> [music]
>> There's a famous quote from the art
critic John Ruskin. Hundreds of people
can talk for one who can think, but
thousands can think for one who can see.
After a lifetime working with people who
had suffered great trauma, [music] Kate
Porterfield
was the one who could see.
And what she saw was a very different
version of Kenny Smith.
someone in pain over what had happened
[music] and what was to come
and he was just having severe nightmares
of being executed over and over. So he
was really tormented at night. Then
during the day he'd be exhausted. He had
a ton of nausea and he had a lot of
images coming back to him over and over
again. And then on top of that starts
the meaning making. And the meaning
making started to really be dark. After
you know several weeks he started to
really think about what had happened
that these people who he knew had done
it to him. [music] How could people do
this to other people? You know he
started to get really and and then he
got depressed. He did he just got fullon
depressed.
He he was actually doing pretty pretty
much [music] post-traumatic stress
symptoms at first and then he moved into
a depression in the spring and then that
kind of worsened for a while and then he
sort of came out of the depression and
then the second execution came up.
The second [music] execution.
The state of Alabama wasn't finished
with Kenny Smith.
Coming up on the series finale of The
Alabama Murders.
>> They said, "Well, Mom, they're coming to
get me."
And you know, we said our goodbyes and
you know, the last thing he said was, "I
love you, Mom.
I've had to go."
So the theory was that because nitrogen
gas was not noxious, it would be could
be given to someone uh as a kind of you
know method of of gas execution that
would not be so troubling to them
because they would breathe it and not
know it and that they would then lose
consciousness and die.
>> [music]
>> I'm not a medical person. I can't opine
on the on what happened. The only one
who can tell us if he experienced pain
is not here to describe it. Um
but what I observed anyhow did not look
like what Alabama had advertised.
[music]
>> [music]
>> Revisionist History is produced by Lucy
Sullivan, Ben Dad Haffrey, and Nina Bird
Lawrence. Additional reporting by Ben
Daddaf Hafrey and Lee Hedgepath. Our
editor is Karen Shakuri. Factchecking by
Kate Furby. Our executive producers
Jacob Smith. Production support from
Luke Lamond. Engineering by Nina Bird
Lawrence. Original scoring by Luis Gara
with Paul Brainard and Jimmy Ba. Sound
design and additional music by Jake
Gski. I'm Malcolm Gladwell.
You can get this entire season now ad
free by subscribing to Revisionist
History on Pushkin Plus. Sign up on the
show page on Apple Podcasts or at
pushkin.fmplus.
Pushkin Plus subscribers can access
adfree episodes, full audiobooks,
exclusive binges, and bonus content for
all Pushkin shows.